We mentioned before that a data model
is characterized by the structure of
the data that it admits,
the operations on that structure, and
a way to specify constraints.
In this lesson,
we'll present a more detailed description
of a number of common data models.
We'll start with relational data.
It is one of the simplest and most
frequently used data models today, and
forms the basis of many other
traditional database management systems,
like MySQL, Oracle,
Teradata, and so forth.
So after this video you'll be able to
describe the structural components
of a relational data model.
Demonstrate which components
become a data model's schema.
Explain the purpose of primary and
foreign keys.
And describe Join and other operations.
The primary data structure for
a relational model is a table, like
the one shown here for a toy application.
But we need to be careful about relational
tables, which are also called relations.
This table actually
represents a set of tuples.
This is a relational tuple,
represented as a row in the table.
We were informally calling
this a record before.
But a relational tuple implies that unless
otherwise stated, the elements of it
like 203 or 204, Mary and
so forth, are atomic.
That is,
they represent one unit of information and
cannot be decomposed further.
We'll return to this issue
in the next few slides.
Thus, this is a relation of six tuples.
Remember, the definition of sets,
it's a collection of distinct
elements of the same type.
That means I cannot add
this tuple to the solution.
Because if I do,
it will be introducing a duplicate.
Now in practice, many systems will allow
duplicate tuples in a relation, but
mechanisms are provided to prevent
duplicate entries if the user so chooses.
So I cannot add it.
Here is another tuple I cannot add.
It has all the right
pieces of information, but
it's all in the wrong order.
So it is a tuple dissimilar with
the other six tuples in the relation.
Okay, so how does the system know
that this tuple is different?
This brings our attention to the very
first row that is the header of this table
painted in black.
This row is part of
the scheme of the table.
Lets look at it.
It tells us the name of the table,
in this case employee.
This also tells us the names of the six
columns called attributes of the relation.
And for each column,
it tells us the allowed data type, that
is the type constraint for each column.
Given this schema,
it should now be clear why the last
red row does not belong to this table.
The schema in a relational table
can also specify constraints,
shown in yellow in the third
line of the schema row.
It says that the minimum salary of
a person has to be greater than 25k.
Further, it states that every employee
must have a first and last name.
They cannot be left null,
that means without a value.
Why doesn't department or
title column have this constraint?
One answer can be that a newly
hired employee may not be assigned
a department or a title yet but
can still be an entry in the table.
However, the department column
has another constraint.
It restricts the possible values
that is the domain of the attribute
to only four possibilities.
HR, IT, research, and business.
Finally, the first says
that ID is a primary key.
This means it is unique for each employee.
And for
every employee knowing the primary key for
the employee will also uniquely know the
other five attributes of that employee.
You should now see that
a table with a primary key
logically implies that the table cannot
have a duplicate record because if we do,
it will violate the uniqueness constraint
associated with the primary key.
Let us introduce a new table containing
the salary history of employees.
The employees are identified
with the column EmpID, but
these are not new values that
this table happens to have.
They are the same IDs that are present in
the ID column of the employee's table,
presented earlier.
This is reflected in
the statement made on the right.
The term References means,
the values in this column can exist
only if the same values if you are in
employees the table being referenced,
also called the parent table.
So in the terminology of the relational
model, the EmpID column of EmpSalaries
table is called a foreign key that refers
to the primary key of the Employees table.
Note that EmpID is not a primary
key in this EmpSalaries table.
Because it is multiple to
post with the same EmpID
reflecting the salary of
the employee at different times.
You will remember join is a common
operation that we discussed before.
So here is an example of
a relational join performed
on the first three columns of employee and
EmpSalaries table.
Where employees.ID, and EmpSalaries.EmpID
columns are matched for equality.
The output table shows
all the columns involved.
The common column is represented once.
This form of join is
called a Natural Join.
It is important to understand that
join is one of the most expensive
that means time consuming and
space consuming operations.
As data becomes larger, and tables contain
hundreds of millions of tuples, the join
operation can easily become a bottleneck
in a larger analytic application.
So for analytical big data application
that needs joins, it's very important to
choose a suitable data management platform
that makes this operation efficient.
We will return to this
issue in module four.
We end this video on a practical note.
In many scientific and
business applications,
people start with CSV files,
manipulate them with the spreadsheet,
then migrate their relational system only
as an afterthought where the data becomes
too large to handle the spreadsheet.
While the spreadsheet offers
many useful features.
It does not conform and enforce many
principles of relational data models.
Consequently, a large amount of time
may be spent in cleaning up and
correcting data errors after
the migration actually happens.
Let me show a few examples from
a spreadsheet that has 125,000 rows and
over 100 columns.
The spreadsheet here lists terrorism
attacks gathered from news media.
So each row represents one attack.
This is a valuable piece of data for
people who study terrorism.
But we are going to look at it from
a relational data modelling viewpoint.
First, notice the column marked in green.
It lists two weapons used in
the attack separated by a semicolon.
Why is this really common?
It makes this column non-atomic.
It means that this column actually
has two different values.
In a relational design, this information
will be moved to another table
just like the multiple salaries of
employees were placed in a separate table.
Next, notice the column outlined in red.
It describes the amount of property
damaged by a possible terrorist attack.
In this column, the intended
legitimate values are unknown,
minor, major and catastrophic.
However, the value in the highlighted
part of the spreadsheet is minor and
then within bracket,
likely less than $1 million.
Which means a query like
find all attacks for
which the property damage is equal to
minor cannot be answered directly.
Instead, we need to perform
a substring search for
minor in the beginning of the description.
Which is doable, but
it's a more expensive operation.
This shows the columns of the spreadsheet.
So this is part of the schema of the data.
If you observe carefully you
will see a recurring pattern.
The designer of the data table determined
that there can be at most three types of
attacks within a single encounter and
represented with three separate columns.
Now in proper relational modeling,
one would say that there is a one to many
relationship between the attack and
the number of attack types.
In such a case, it would be more prudent
to place these attack type
columns in a separate table and
connect with the parent using a primary
key, foreign key relationship.
Here's another block,
with a similar pattern,
this time this is about the types and
subtypes of weapons used.
Now can you determine how you might
be able to reorganize this block?
We'll leave this as an exercise.